this video is sponsored by brilliant
let's say we have a thousand drinks that
all look identical but some of them have
been poisoned for now let's say we know
that any drink has a 10% chance of being
poisoned and then we'll solve a more
generic case later now the question is
in the most efficient way how can you
determine exactly which drinks are the
poison ones what you have available to
you is a machine where you can input as
much or as little liquid as you want and
if any of it has been poisoned it will
display poisoned if not it'll say safe
so yes you can mix drinks you could put
a drop from every single cup in the
machine if you wanted then run the test
but if or really when it displays
poisoned that simply means at least one
of the drinks is poisoned doesn't tell
you which one or how many so the goal is
to find the method that uses the least
number of tests on average now the
simplest method and clearly not the one
we're looking for is that we test each
drink individually thus it will take a
thousand tests before we know exactly
which drinks for the poisoned ones so
now the question is how can we do better
well let's simplify this real quick if
let's say we knew there was only one
poisoned drink what we could do is then
make two groups of 500 drinks and add a
bit from every drink in one group to the
machine then run the test that's one
test in total so far if the result is
positive for the poison then you know
the one you're looking for is part of
that 500 and from there you could split
that group into 250 and 250 then put a
drop from every drink in one of those
groups in the machine and run a second
test if it's negative let's say then the
poisoned drink as part of the other 250
which you can then split again and
repeat exactly the same steps with this
method you love your answer and ten
tests which is quite an improvement from
1,000 the problem is we can't really do
this efficiently when we don't know the
exact number of poisoned drinks but the
solution is similar I decided I'm just
going to tell you the exact method with
numbers now and then I'm going to
explain how these numbers are found
after
so the first thing we're going to do is
take the thousand drinks and divide them
into groups of four which means there'll
be two hundred fifty groups in total
we'll then take a sample from each drink
in the first group and run a test and
then we'll repeat this for every single
group so that will come out to 250 tests
so far which I'll keep on the screen now
some tests like that first one will come
back as safe
this means we can just discard those
because there's no poison in any of them
after that the last step in this method
is to test every drink that remains
individually the question is on average
how many drinks or groups will remain
after discarding the safe ones well any
given drink has a 10% chance of being
poisoned
that means there's a 90% chance any
given drink is safe with that we can
then multiply all those 90 percents
together which tells us there's a 65
point six percent chance all four drinks
in a group are safe that's how many
groups are expected to be removed thus
thirty four point four percent of the
groups will have at least one poisoned
drink so of the 250 groups in total
thirty four point four percent will
remain doing that multiplication comes
out to eighty six groups in total in
eighty six groups times four drinks per
group is three hundred and forty four
individual tests that need to be done
adding that to the original 250 we get
that on average it will take 594 tests
before we know exactly which drinks are
the poisoned ones still a big
improvement over a thousand so that's
the answer but now let's see why we
chose groups of four instead of
something else and what to do when we
don't know the exact percent chance that
a certain drink is poisoned basically
we're going to do the same thing again
but the generic case with variables
rather than specific numbers instead of
groups of four will call it groups of n
thus there are a thousand over n groups
and a thousand over n tests we have to
do it first
now we again have to find how many of
these groups will remain after we remove
the ones with only safe drinks
we'll say each drink has a pee chance of
being poisoned instead of 10% or make it
more generic this the chance a drink is
not poisoned is one minus P so for a
single group the chance that all the
drinks are safe is 1 minus P to the N
because we got to multiply that
probability by itself n times these are
the groups that are removed meaning the
percentage of groups that remain where
at least one is poisoned is one minus
that then if we multiply that by the
1000 over n groups we started with that
tells us how many groups remain to be
tested then multiply that by n drinks
per group and we find the number of
individual tests that must be done on
top of the 1,000 over N and finally to
put this all together I'm gonna graph
this as a function of n so we can see
the total number of tests on average
that would need to be done the y-axis
represents that total number of tests
well the x axis is the number of drinks
per group in that initial split and
currently p is 10%
remember 1000 test was that worst case
scenario testing every drink
individually but as you can see by
grouping we can do much better in this
case we see the minimum integer value of
n is here a 4 comma 594 and this
reflects what we saw earlier with the
four drinks per group and the 594 tests
if I change the percent chance of any
drink being poisoned to 5 percent then
the new minimum is here meaning we
should split the 1000 drinks into groups
of 5 at first and will on average do 426
tests at 20% this here's the minimum but
you'll notice that as the percentage of
drinks that are poison goes above 30%
then our technique becomes worse than
just checking each drink individually so
this isn't always the best method but if
you at least knew that the percentage of
poisoned drinks was less than 20% let's
say you'll see if we split the drinks
into groups of anything between like 2
and 10 at first the number of tests on
average will be less than a thousand
here's a table some other percentages
and the optimal way to split the 1000
drinks into groups now some people may
think this has no applications but that
isn't the case because imagine you have
1000 blood samples and need to test them
for some disease like HIV since the
percentage of people who have HIV is
much less than 20% we can use these
group testing techniques to minimize the
number of tests a machine may need to
perform and yes this has been applied to
healthcare as well as the pharmaceutical
industry for example what we've seen
here is not the only method but it was
one I really liked now there are
countless other real-world uses of
probability out there some I've done
videos on but there's even more you can
learn over at brilliant org this video
sponsor one course I would definitely
recommend that relates to what we saw
here is their applied probability course
as this shows you how probability and
famous theorems can be used to solve or
analyze real-world problems examples
would include science similar to what we
saw here quality control sports and more
plus they discussed misconceptions in
regards to probability which I'm very
into because the misuse of probability
and statistics actually shows up in the
real world and media all the time
brilliant is a favorite on this channel
and that's because they focus on showing
you why you're learning the things they
teach and how to apply this knowledge
plus I really do like their
visualizations and intuitive animations
because it's really one of the best ways
to learn technical topics but no matter
what you're in the learning they have
dozens of other courses in math science
and engineering to choose from so if you
want to get started right now and
support this channel you can click the
link below or go to brilliant org slash
Zack Star and the first 200 people to
sign up will get 20% off their annual
premium subscription then with that I'm
gonna end that video there thanks to my
supporters on patreon social media links
are down below and I'll see you guys in
the next video